What Happened is a 2017 book by Hillary Rodham Clinton about her experiences as the Democratic Party's nominee and general election candidate for President of the United States in the 2016 election. Published on September 12, 2017, it is her seventh book with her publisher, Simon & Schuster.


== Inception and advance publicity ==

Existence of a new Clinton work was first revealed in February 2017, but at the time it was billed as a volume of essays centered around the author's favorite sayings, with only some allusions to the campaign. Financial terms of that work, which had no announced title, were not publicly disclosed but industry observers expected her monetary compensation to be large. The new purposing of the work and its thematic substance were revealed in July 2017. After the title was announced, it was mocked with sarcastic memes on Twitter.
The New York Times wrote that the stated aim of the book was to offer an intimate view of what it was like for Clinton to run as the first female presidential candidate from a major party in United States history, in an often vicious and turbulent campaign. This is her third memoir, following 2003's Living History and 2014's Hard Choices; advance publicity for the work said it would be her "most personal" yet and quoted from her words in the book's Introduction: "In the past, for reasons I try to explain, I've often felt I had to be careful in public, like I was up on a wire without a net. Now I'm letting my guard down." Clinton promised a new level of candor as a major theme of the initial publicity surrounding the book. The work was also said to include some self-help ideas about how to get past highly unpleasant experiences.


== Contents ==
What Happened is organized into six main parts, entitled "Perseverance", "Competition", "Sisterhood", "Idealism and Realism", "Frustration", and "Resilience". Each part has from two to five chapters within it.
The book opens with a scene from the United States presidential inauguration of 2017, attended by her and her husband, where Clinton watched Donald Trump take office. She begins:
The book closes with a scene from a speech she gave at her alma mater Wellesley College. Clinton concludes the book with the advice to readers to "Keep going."
The book is a first-person account by one of the candidates involved in the United States presidential election, 2016. The book is dedicated to "the team that stood with me in 2016", and one of the chapters of the book is largely a list of everyone who worked on her campaign.
In the book, Clinton blames her electoral loss on a combination of factors, including James Comey, Vladimir Putin, Barack Obama, Mitch McConnell, The New York Times, the media as a whole, Bernie Sanders and his supporters, Green Party candidate Jill Stein, sexism, white resentment, and herself, specifically her comments on putting "coal miners out of business" and labeling her opponent's supporters as a "basket of deplorables".
The book contains a number of Clinton's policy proposals, featuring her analysis of a problem area and her ideas for how to solve it.
Another subject of the book is how to get through difficult experiences. Clinton discusses her practice of yoga and her liking of chardonnay. But in particular, she lists a large number of books that helped her cope with the loss in one way or another. These included mysteries by Louise Penny, Jacqueline Winspear, Donna Leon, and Caroline and Charles Todd. They also included the Neapolitan novels of Elena Ferrante, the spiritual works of Henri Nouwen, and the collected poems of Maya Angelou, Marge Piercy and T. S. Eliot.


== Sales ==


=== Domestic sales ===

The hardcover edition was published on September 12, 2017; it immediately went to the top of the Barnes & Noble, Amazon, and the USA Today bestseller lists.
It debuted at number one on The New York Times Best Seller List for both hardcover nonfiction and combined print and e-book nonfiction sales where it stayed for 2 weeks. It dropped to number two on both lists in its third week. By the beginning of November it had spent six weeks in the top four of the list. By the beginning of January 2018 the book had spent sixteen weeks on the list. The following week it fell off.
What Happened sold 300,000 copies in its first week. The first-week sales were lower than her 2003 memoir, Living History, but triple the first-week sales of Clinton's previous memoir, 2014's Hard Choices.
The first-week hardcover sales for What Happened were 167,000. This marks the strongest hardcover debut for a nonfiction book since 2012's No Easy Day. Simon & Schuster also announced that What Happened sold more e-books in its first-week than any nonfiction book had since 2010.
The book debuted at number one of the Publishers Weekly "Top 10 overall" and "hardcover nonfiction" bestseller lists. In its third week on the lists, it dropped to number three of the "Top 10 overall" and to number two of the "hardcover nonfiction" lists with a total of 311,982 hardcover copies sold. As of December 10, 2017, the book has sold 448,947 hardcover copies.


=== International sales ===
What Happened also performed strongly in its release outside of the United States.
In Canada, What Happened debuted atop The Globe and Mail's hardcover non-fiction best sellers list. It remained atop the chart for six consecutive weeks.
In the United Kingdom, What Happened debuted atop The Sunday Times bestseller list.
In Ireland, What Happened was able to peak atop the Nielson Bookscan component chart for hardcover non-fiction. On the primary Irish Nielsen Bookscan chart tracking sales of both hardcover and paperback books in all genres, What Happened debuted at number ten (selling 767 copies). It jumped to number seven in its second week (selling 800 copies). It jumped further to number four in its third week (selling 1,117 copies). In its fourth week it dropped to number six (however with consistent sales, selling 1,116 copies). It exited the top-ten in its seventh week.
In New Zealand, What Happened debuted number 8 on Nielsen Bookscan's "International Non-fiction - Adults" chart.
In Australia, What Happened charted on Books+Publishing's bestsellers chart.


== Critical reception ==
What Happened polarized book critics.
Entertainment Weekly gave it a "B" grade. Writer Tina Jordan said:

I think the first woman candidate for President, the one who won the popular vote, has every right to offer her own take on the election. But bear in mind that many  if not all  of the people tearing down Clinton and her new memoir, What Happened, haven't actually read it. Bear in mind, too, that few  if any  of these same people called out Bernie Sanders for writing his own campaign memoir, one that dropped just days post-election. No, there's some sort of special virulence reserved for Clinton. And she gets it. In fact, she spends much of What Happened parsing that very question.

Jennifer Senior of The New York Times said:

"What Happened" is not one book, but many. It is a candid and blackly funny account of her mood in the direct aftermath of losing to Donald J. Trump. It is a post-mortem, in which she is both coroner and corpse. It is a feminist manifesto. It is a score-settling jubilee. It is a rant against James B. Comey, Bernie Sanders, the media, James B. Comey, Vladimir Putin and James B. Comey. It is a primer on Russian spying. It is a thumping of Trump.

For The Washington Post, writer David Weigel noted that Clinton "apologizes to the reader, who has to relive all of this. 'It wasn't healthy or productive,' she writes, 'to dwell on the ways I felt I'd been shivved.' It's a perfect word, 'shivved.' The Hillary Clinton of this bitter memoir ... again and again ... blames herself for losing, apologizing for her 'dumb' email management, for giving paid speeches to banks, for saying she would put coal miners 'out of business.' She veers between regret and righteous, sometimes in the same paragraph."
A review in the Chicago Tribune by Heidi Stevens stated that the passages in the book about Russia's involvement in the US election "read like a spy novel". Thomas Frank in The Guardian contends that "Unfortunately, her new book is less an effort to explain than it is to explain away. ... Still, by exercising a little discernment, readers can find clues to the mystery of 2016 here and there among the clouds of blame-evasion and positive thinking."
An analysis by Ezra Klein, editor-in-chief of Vox, saw a different role for the book, making reference to Clinton's belief that progress is best made by working within the political system: "What Happened has been sold as Clinton's apologia for her 2016 campaign, and it is that. But it's more remarkable for Clinton's extended defense of a political style that has become unfashionable in both the Republican and Democratic parties."
David L. Ulin of the Los Angeles Times wrote in his review for the newspaper that the book is a "necessary  if at times clunky and unconvincing  retrospective" and that "She should have been president, and she knows it; regret and loss is palpable throughout the book. And yet it's also the case that she remains unable to reckon with just what happened in the 2016 election, looking for explanations, for reasons, while at the same time never quite uncovering her own complicity."
Sarah Jones of The New Republic wrote:

The real problem with What Happened is that it is not the book it needed to be. It spends more time on descriptions of Clinton's various post-election coping strategies, which include chardonnay and "alternative nostril breathing," than it does on her campaign decisions in the Midwest. It is written for her fans, in other words, and not for those who want real answers about her campaign, and who worry that the Democratic Party is learning the wrong lessons from the 2016 debacle.

Jeff Greenfield wrote in Politico Magazine that the book suggests "that the person we've seen over the past quarter-century, and the person we watched seek the presidency twice, is the authentic Hillary. In fact, to judge by her book, she may have been the most authentic person in the race."


== Awards and honors ==
Time magazine listed What Happened as #1 on its list of the best non-fiction books of 2017. NPR's Book Concierge included What Happened on its list of "2017s Great Reads". What Happened also won the Goodreads Choice Award for Best Memoir & Autobiography.


== Book tour ==

It was announced on August 28, 2017, that Hillary Clinton would be starting a North American book tour in September 2017 to promote What Happens, as well as the picture book It Takes a Village (a new take on that 1996 volume).
Clinton scheduled more than thirty appearances in cities across the United States and Canada, and her book tour lasted through December 2017.


=== Hillary Clinton: Live ===
Clinton partook in a series of engagements titled Hillary Clinton: Live. At a number of her appearances, Clinton was met with enthusiastic audiences filling multi-thousand-seat venues.


=== Book signings ===
In addition to Hillary Clinton Live events, Clinton also held book signings at locations across the United States as part of her book tour.
Tickets for particular signings sold-out very soon after going on sale. For instance, tickets to Clinton's signing at Vroman's Bookstore in Pasadena sold-out within ninety minutes. The president of Vroman's Bookstore reported that it was the fastest that the store had ever sold-out for an event.
A number of the book tour's stops were located relatively near Chappaqua, New York, where Clinton maintains her personal residence. This allowed Clinton to spend time with her family while on tour. For instance, Clinton brought her grandchildren to her appearance at Oblong Books & Music in Rhinebeck, New York.


== See also ==
Hillary Clinton presidential campaign, 2016
Shattered: Inside Hillary Clinton's Doomed Campaign


== References ==


== External links ==
Discussion with Clinton on What Happened, September 18, 2017, C-SPAN
Discussion with Clinton on book and related matters with Ezra Klein, September 12, 2017